Feature: An alternative approach to handling "null conditional" ops (#251)
dotnet/csharpstandard: standard/expressions.md

> ```
> Within the `A` class, those occurrences of the Color identifier that reference the Color type are delimited by `**`, and those that reference the Color field are not. *end example*

### §null-conditional-member-access Null Conditional Member Access

> A *null_conditional_member_access* consists of a *primary_expression* followed by a "`?.`" token, followed by an *Identifier* with an optional *type_argument_list*, followed by zero or more *unconditional_access_part*s.

Reviewer: I believe `?.` is not a token.  It is a pair of tokens.  You could put a space between them in a program.

Author: Changed

> ```
> Within the `A` class, those occurrences of the Color identifier that reference the Color type are delimited by `**`, and those that reference the Color field are not. *end example*

### §null-conditional-member-access Null Conditional Member Access

> A *null_conditional_member_access* consists of a *primary_expression* followed by a "`?.`" token, followed by an *Identifier*, optionally followed by a *type_argument_list*.

Reviewer: I don't believe `?.` is one token.  See https://sharplab.io/#v2:EYLgtghgzgLgpgJwDQxASwDZICYgNQA+AAgEwCMAsAFBEDMABKfQML0De19XjDRALPQCyACiJkADPSgBKdp24KAbhAT0M9ALxSA/PQB0AGTgA7AOYwAFgG55XAL7U7QA

Author: Hmmm... Is there a good reason to allow spaces or is this an artefact of the way the compiler added the token? The token `??` already exists (as do other multi-symbol tokens where a prefix is also a token), does the compiler allow a space? Historically there was the change to break up right shift (assignment) due to the conflict when generics were introduced, but there is no such conflict between `?`, `??`, `?.` and `?[` is there?

If it is technically a breaking change to make it a single token I really hope it doesn't effect anyone (we might never know of course as they could be too embarrassed to admit it!)

I'd encourage we go for the single token, but its not a hill I'll die on! What do folks think? (The question applies to both PR #7 and this one).

Author: Changed

```ANTLR
null_conditional_member_access
    : primary_expression '?.' Identifier type_argument_list?
    ;
```

> A  *null_conditional_member_access* expression `E` is of the form `P?.I`. Let `T` be the type of the *member_access*  expression `P.I`. The meaning of `E` is determined as follows:

Reviewer 2: Super-nit - is there a double space after `*member_access*`?

Author: Not a super-nit if the MD parser doesn't remove them. I'll take a look an remove any I find.

- If `T` is a type parameter that is not known to be a reference type or a non-nullable value type, a compile-time error occurs.
- If `T` is a non-nullable value type, then the type of `E` is `T?`, and the meaning of `E` is the same as the meaning of:
	> ```csharp

> 	> ((object)P == null) ? (T?)null : P.I

Reviewer 2: Minor note for the future - I'd love to replace the `((object)P == null)` part with `P is null`. We can only do that when pattern matching is implemented, but I think it would be good to do so when we can.

I'm tempted to file a reminder issue... any thoughts?

Author: I think it is worth noting regardless of whether we go with PR #7 or this one.

Reviewer 2: Filed #328. Resolving.

	> ```
  Except that `P` is evaluated only once.

> - Otherwise the type of `E` is `T`, and the meaning of `E` is the same as the meaning of:

Reviewer 2: Any reason the indentation here isn't the same as in the lines above?

Author: Do you mean indenting the code within the bullet? That seems correct to me, does the Standard not do this? Or are you referring to something else?

Reviewer 2: I suspect the output may be fine in each case, but it's a bit odd to see the inconsistency. Compare lines 1295 and 1300... I can't see why they'd have different numbers of spaces before the `>`

Author: It was probably down to my tab setting be 3 and bullet indentation just being 2. I pushed them back 1 space, no changed in output

### §null-conditional-member-access Null Conditional Member Access

A *null_conditional_member_access* consists of a *primary_expression* followed by a "`?.`" token, followed by an *Identifier* with an optional *type_argument_list*, followed by zero or more *unconditional_access_part*s.

```ANTLR
null_conditional_member_access

>     : primary_expression '?.' Identifier type_argument_list? unconditional_access_part*

Reviewer 2: "unconditional_access_part" sounds like something that will be evaluated unconditionally, and I don't *think* that's what we're looking for, is it?

Author: I agree its not a great name, but probably better than my other thought of `null_faulting_access`, over to the wordsmiths!

Reviewer: `?.` is a pair of tokens.

Author: Changed

> ```
> Within the `A` class, those occurrences of the Color identifier that reference the Color type are delimited by `**`, and those that reference the Color field are not. *end example*

### §null-conditional-member-access Null Conditional Member Access

> A *null_conditional_member_access* is a conditional relation of *member_access* ([§12.7.5](expressions.md#member-access)) and  it is a binding time error if the result type is `void`. For a null conditional expression where the result type may be `void` see ([](expressions.md#null-conditional-invocation-expression)).

Reviewer 2: What does "conditional relation" mean here? (Is it broadly "conditional equivalent to"?) Not objecting to the term - just checking whether it's expected to have a precise technical meaning, or whether it's just descriptive.

Author: I thought the connection between *null_conditional_member_access* & *member_access*, and similarly for the element access pair, was worth noting. That left the wording... I was going to write "sibling" but for some reason ended up with "relation". It is purely descriptive and I welcome better wordsmithing!

Author: Changed to "conditional version", its not exactly "equivalent" (due to the capturing) but I can see "relation" might be confusing. I'll resolve this for now but do come back if version isn't suitable.

> A *null_conditional_member_access* is a conditional relation of *member_access* ([§12.7.5](expressions.md#member-access)) and  it is a binding time error if the result type is `void`. For a null conditional expression where the result type may be `void` see ([](expressions.md#null-conditional-invocation-expression)).

Reviewer 3: Here's how the tool will recognize the link to the new clause you've added:

```suggestion
A *null_conditional_member_access* is a conditional relation of *member_access* ([§12.7.5](expressions.md#member-access)) and  it is a binding time error if the result type is `void`. For a null conditional expression where the result type may be `void` see (§null-conditional-invocation).
```

A *null_conditional_member_access* consists of a *primary_expression* followed by the two tokens "`?`" and "`.`", followed by an *Identifier* with an optional *type_argument_list*, followed by zero or more *captured_access*es.

```ANTLR
null_conditional_member_access
    : primary_expression '?' '.' Identifier type_argument_list? captured_access*
    ;
    

> captured_access

Reviewer 2: Is "captured access" a new concept here? If so, might we want to *consider* naming it something else to avoid it being confused with variable capture within anonymous functions?

Author: This is a new concept, the language doesn't really have any other operators which behave quite in the way the null -conditional ones do – they "capture" following operations (#7 captures more than #251, it is one of the differences, but that isn't fundamental *per se* and both have to find a way to describe the behaviour). After some iterations I came up with "captured access", I didn't consider the comparison with "variable capture"...

"[null] conditional access" didn't seem right as the accesses themselves are not conditional [and they will fault on null], they are just the subject of another conditional – as the explanation of the semantics in terms of an equivalent conditional (`?`/':` or `if`) shows. Captured, Controlled, Effected, Impacted, Subject? I just noticed  I went with the first alphabetically (pure happenstance) ;-)

Another case where wordsmithing input is welcome!

Reviewer: *nested_access* ?

Author: I don't think they’re *nested* – if anything isn't it the *enclosed*/*first* which is impacting the *enclosing*/*following* so nested sounds sort of backwards to me? So while *captured* isn’t great I think its a smidgen better. But is there something better? Words are hard, give me numbers any day ;-)

Reviewer 2: So just to be clear, a captured/nested access is one that's gated by a null conditional member access - i.e. it looks unconditional in itself, but it's conditional based on the *earlier* null conditional member access, yes?

"Implicitly conditional access"? "Effectively conditional access"? I'm not liking either of those, but if we can agree on what impression we're trying to give, that'll be a start :)

    : '.' Identifier type_argument_list?    // member access
    | '[' argument_list ']'                 // element access
    | '(' argument_list? ')'                // invocation
    ;

null_conditional_projection_initializer
    : primary_expression '?' '.' Identifier type_argument_list?
    ;
```

A  *null_conditional_member_access* expression `E` is of the form `P?.A`. Let `T` be the type of the expression `P.A`. The meaning of `E` is determined as follows:

- If `T` is a type parameter that is not known to be a reference type or a non-nullable value type, a compile-time error occurs.
- If `T` is a non-nullable value type, then the type of `E` is `T?`, and the meaning of `E` is the same as the meaning of:
  > ```csharp
  > ((object)P == null) ? (T?)null : P.A
  > ```
  Except that `P` is evaluated only once.
- Otherwise the type of `E` is `T`, and the meaning of `E` is the same as the meaning of:
  > ```csharp
  > ((object)P == null) ? null : P.A
  > ```
  Except that `P` is evaluated only once.

> *Note*: A *null_conditional_member_access*  is left-associative ([§12.4.2](expressions.md#1242-operator-precedence-and-associativity)) so in an expression of the form:

Reviewer: The same would be true if it were right associative, right?  I suggest dropping the comment on associativity and just get to the point:
```suggestion
*Note*: In an expression of the form:
```

Author: OK

> ```csharp
> P?.I₀?.I₁
> ```
then if `P` evaluates to `null` neither `I₀` or `I₁` are evaluated. The same is true if an expression is a sequence of *null_conditional_member_access* or *null_conditional_element_access* §null-conditional-element-access operations. *end note*

> A *null_conditional_projection_initializer* is a subset of *null_conditional_member_access* and has the same semantics. It only occurs as a projection initializer in an anonymous object creation expression ([12.7.11.7](expressions.md#anonymous_object_creation_expression)).

Reviewer 2: Describing one thing (that isn't a set) as a subset of another thing doesn't quite sit right. I think I know what you mean... let's see if we can come up with something better in the meeting (or you can convince me that this is fine, of course).

Author: @jskeet – You can think of rules as defining a set, but how about:

```suggestion
A *null_conditional_projection_initializer* is a restriction of *null_conditional_member_access* and has the same semantics. It only occurs as a projection initializer in an anonymous object creation expression ([12.7.11.7](expressions.md#anonymous_object_creation_expression)).
```

or "a restricted version of"? "Restrict" as the latter allows everything of the former and some more.

Reviewer 2: I definitely prefer restriction over subset, yes.

I think I'm mentally distinguishing between "the rule" and "the set of text sequences that match the rule" - the latter is defined by the former, but it's not the same thing to me. At least the way I'm thinking today, which isn't necessarily how I'll be thinking tomorrow :)

Author: Restriction it is.

> ```
> Within the `A` class, those occurrences of the Color identifier that reference the Color type are delimited by `**`, and those that reference the Color field are not. *end example*

> ### §null-conditional-member-access Null Conditional Member Access

Reviewer 2: I've just been trying to figure out how this works in a couple of cases, and while I think it's the right approach, we may need a bit more explanation.

For example consider:

```csharp
string x = null;
int? y = x?.GetHashCode();
```

My understanding is that that is a null_conditional_member_access with a dependent_access of `()` - so we get the null value. It's *not* a null_conditional_invocation_expression, because that's only used in places where the result (if any) is discarded. Is that the case? If so, it's a bit confusing because `x.GetHashCode()` is an invocation expresson, isn't it?

I'm not suggesting that we change any of the existing text - just consider adding an example/note.

> A *null_conditional_member_access* is a conditional version of *member_access* ([§12.7.5](expressions.md#1275-member-access)) and  it is a binding time error if the result type is `void`. For a null conditional expression where the result type may be `void` see (§null-conditional-invocation-expression).

Reviewer 2: Nit: double space in "and it"

A *null_conditional_member_access* consists of a *primary_expression* followed by the two tokens "`?`" and "`.`", followed by an *Identifier* with an optional *type_argument_list*, followed by zero or more *dependent_access*es.

```ANTLR
null_conditional_member_access
    : primary_expression '?' '.' Identifier type_argument_list? dependent_access*
    ;
    

> dependent_access

Reviewer 2: Just to check, `primary_expression` will cover nested null-conditional member accesses, yes? So if we have:

```csharp
x?.M1()?.M2().M3
```

that ends up with a "top-level" null_conditional_member_access where the primary_expression is `x?.M1()?.M2()`, which is itself a null_conditional_member_access with a primary_expression of `x?.M1()`, which is itself a null_conditional_member_access with a primary expression of `x`... is that right?

See [§20.6](delegates.md#206-delegate-invocation) for details of multiple invocation lists without parameters.

> ### §null-conditional-invocation-expression Null Conditional Invocation Expression

Reviewer 2: Is this actually implemented? I've never seen it before. Is the expectation that it should make something like the code below compile?

```csharp
Action action = null;
action?();
```

That *doesn't* compile, whereas `action?.Invoke();` does.

Perhaps this was a part of the feature proposal that was dropped but not removed from the text?

Reviewer 2: Note: it's possible that we need a *null_conditional_invocation_expression* as well as *null_conditional_member_access* in order for `action?.Invoke()` (or any other sort of invocation via a null conditional operator) to work - I'm not immediately clear whether that counts as a *null_conditional_member_access* where the result is a method group that is then invoked. (Brain not quite working right now.)

Author: I didn't originally include as I was using MS's C#6 Language Reference as the informal spec to work form, then I noticed it in PR #7 so added it assuming I'd missed it elsewhere. Following your query I did I wider search and found a reference on SO that it doesn't exist due to too many parsing issues. I'll remove it.

> A *null_conditional_invocation_expression* consists of a *primary_expression* followed by a "`?(`" token, followed by an optional *argument_list*, followed by a "`)`" token.

Reviewer: The `?` and `(` are separate tokens.

Reviewer: But I think it isn't implemented because of an ambiguity with the `?:` expression.

Author: I'll "resolve conversation" this one as it's dealt with by the preceding thread (both operators should be handled the same way!)

See [§20.6](delegates.md#206-delegate-invocation) for details of multiple invocation lists without parameters.

### §null-conditional-invocation Null Conditional Invocation Expression

A *null_conditional_invocation_expression* is syntactically either a *null_conditional_member_access* ([§12.7.6](expressions.md#null_conditional_member_access)) or *null_conditional_element_access* ([§12.7.6](expressions.md#null_conditional_element_access)) where the final *captured_access* is an invocation expression ([§12.7.6](expressions.md#inovation_expression)).

> Unlike the syntactically equivalent *null_conditional_member_access* or *null_conditional_element_access* a *null_conditional_invocation_expression* may be classified as nothing and only occurs as part of a *statement_expression* or *anonymous_method_body*.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Unlike the syntactically equivalent *null_conditional_member_access* or *null_conditional_element_access*, a *null_conditional_invocation_expression* may be classified as nothing and only occurs as part of a *statement_expression* or *anonymous_method_body*.
```

(This is just adding a comma for clarity - we've got three things in a row, and I think it's helpful to emphasize that the first two belong together, and the third is separate.)

```ANTLR
null_conditional_invocation_expression
    : null_conditional_member_access '(' argument_list? ')'
    | null_conditional_element_access '(' argument_list? ')'
    ;
```

> A  *null_conditional_invocation_expression* expression `E` is of the form `P?I`; where `I` is the remainder of the syntactically equivalent *null_conditional_member_access* or *null_conditional_element_access*, `I` will therefore start with `.` or `[`. Let `PI` signify the concatention of `P` and `I`. The meaning of `E` is the same as the meaning of:

Reviewer 2: I wonder whether something other than `I` would be useful here... when I see `I` in an example, I expect it to be an identifier, rather than something beginning with `.` or `[`. Perhaps `A` for access?

Author: Changed to A

> ```csharp

> > if ((object)P == null) ? PI

Reviewer 2: Unless I'm mis-reading it, we don't want the `?` here.

Author: Bad copy'n'paste, fixed.

See [§20.6](delegates.md#206-delegate-invocation) for details of multiple invocation lists without parameters.

### §null-conditional-invocation-expression Null Conditional Invocation Expression

A *null_conditional_invocation_expression* is syntactically either a *null_conditional_member_access* (§null-conditional-member-access) or *null_conditional_element_access* (§null-conditional-element-access) where the final *captured_access* is an invocation expression ([§12.7.6](expressions.md#1276-invocation-expressions)).

> Unlike the syntactically equivalent *null_conditional_member_access* or *null_conditional_element_access*, a *null_conditional_invocation_expression* may be classified as nothing and only occurs as part of a *statement_expression* ([§13.7](statements.md#137-expression-statements)) or *anonymous_function_body* ([§12.16.1](expressions.md#12161-general)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unlike the syntactically equivalent *null_conditional_member_access* or *null_conditional_element_access*, a *null_conditional_invocation_expression* may be classified as nothing when it occurs as a *statement_expression* ([§13.7](statements.md#137-expression-statements)) or *anonymous_function_body* ([§12.16.1](expressions.md#12161-general)).
```

I don't think this is complete.  It is also permitted as the body of an expression-bodied method whose return type is `void`.  Alternatively, perhaps it is overspecified as that is a *statement_expression*, but that is also true for an *anonymous_function_body* when the return type is `void`.

Author: You are right, expression-bodied method has been missed.

As currently written the grammar doesn't allow a *null_conditional_invocation_expression* within an expression-bodied method. (However both #7 and this one syntactically accept their respective versions of null conditional access which end in an invocation; the restriction here in #251 that such an access cannot return void is a semantic one.)

I haven't looked at whether this can be accommodated easily in #251's current approach of splitting void handling into different rules vs. the nested bullet semantics (as in #7) – the latter are just messy and this part of #251 was an attempt to make the description easier to follow, but maybe this will turn out to show that cannot be done (at least using seperate rules).

Null conditionals are certainly proving “fun” (as in both #7 & #251 have problems 🙁)

Author: @gafter – You wrote “Alternatively, perhaps it is overspecified as that is a *statement_expression*…” For a moment that seemed to provide hope, but then I considered it, doesn't an expression bodied member have an *expression* and not a *statement_expression*? In this context the latter might be nice, but I think it is/should be the former.

Looking at this I realised that expression bodied members may not be allowed for elsewhere, will add an Issue.

Author: @gafter – your wording suggestion above was resolved differently by truncating the sentence after "as nothing"

A *null_conditional_invocation_expression* occurs within the context of a *statement_expression* ([§13.7](statements.md#137-expression-statements)), *anonymous_function_body* ([§12.16.1](expressions.md#12161-general)), or *method_body* ([§15.6.1](classes.md#1561-general)).

Unlike the syntactically equivalent *null_conditional_member_access* or *null_conditional_element_access*, a *null_conditional_invocation_expression* may be classified as nothing.

```ANTLR
null_conditional_invocation_expression
    : null_conditional_member_access '(' argument_list? ')'
    | null_conditional_element_access '(' argument_list? ')'
    ;
```

A  *null_conditional_invocation_expression* expression `E` is of the form `P?A`; where `A` is the remainder of the syntactically equivalent *null_conditional_member_access* or *null_conditional_element_access*, `A` will therefore start with `.` or `[`. Let `PA` signify the concatention of `P` and `A`. When `E` occurs as a *statement_expression* the meaning of `E` is the same as the meaning of the *statement*:
> ```csharp

> > if ((object)P == null) PA

Reviewer 3: Shouldn't this be `!=`?

```suggestion
> if ((object)P != null) PA
```

Author: Whoops, good catch!

> ```
When `E` occurs as a *anonymous_function_body* or *method_body* the meaning of `E` is the same as the meaning of the *block*:
> ```csharp

> > { if ((object)P == null) PA; }

Reviewer 3: Same as 1533:

```suggestion
> { if ((object)P != null) PA; }
```

Author: And I copied and pasted it… :-(

Depending on the context in which it is used, an indexer access causes invocation of either the *get_accessor* or the *set_accessor* of the indexer. If the indexer access is the target of an assignment, the *set_accessor* is invoked to assign a new value ([§12.18.2](expressions.md#12182-simple-assignment)). In all other cases, the *get_accessor* is invoked to obtain the current value ([§12.2.2](expressions.md#1222-values-of-expressions)).

### §null-conditional-element-access Null Conditional Element Access

> A *null_conditional_element_access* consists of a *primary_no_array_creation_expression* followed by a "`?[`" token, followed by an *argument_list*, followed by a "`]`" token, followed by zero or more *unconditional_access_part*s.

Reviewer: `?[` is a pair of tokens.

Author: Changed.

### §null-conditional-element-access Null Conditional Element Access

A *null_conditional_element_access* consists of a *primary_no_array_creation_expression* followed by the two tokens "`?`" and "`[`", followed by an *argument_list*, followed by a "`]`" token, followed by zero or more *captured_access*es.

```ANTLR
null_conditional_element_access
    : primary_no_array_creation_expression '?' '[' argument_list ']' captured_access*
    ;
```

A *null_conditional_element_access* is a conditional relation of *element_access* ([§12.7.7](expressions.md#element-access)) and it is a binding time error if the result type is `void`. For a null conditional expression where the result type may be `void` see ([](expressions.md#null-conditional-invocation-expression)).

> 

Reviewer 2: Remove one of these blank lines?

Author: Done

Depending on the context in which it is used, an indexer access causes invocation of either the *get_accessor* or the *set_accessor* of the indexer. If the indexer access is the target of an assignment, the *set_accessor* is invoked to assign a new value ([§12.18.2](expressions.md#12182-simple-assignment)). In all other cases, the *get_accessor* is invoked to obtain the current value ([§12.2.2](expressions.md#1222-values-of-expressions)).

### §null-conditional-element-access Null Conditional Element Access

A *null_conditional_element_access* consists of a *primary_no_array_creation_expression* followed by the two tokens "`?`" and "`[`", followed by an *argument_list*, followed by a "`]`" token, followed by zero or more *captured_access*es.

```ANTLR
null_conditional_element_access
    : primary_no_array_creation_expression '?' '[' argument_list ']' captured_access*
    ;
```

> A *null_conditional_element_access* is a conditional version of *element_access* ([§12.7.7](expressions.md#1277-element-access)) and it is a binding time error if the result type is `void`. For a null conditional expression where the result type may be `void` see (§null-conditional-invocation-expression).

Reviewer: What forbids this?

```csharp
    void M2(Q q) => q?.M()[1];
```

Author: I think the answer is the type system (both #7 & #251 accept this syntactically) unless I'm misunderstanding the question?

If it was `void M2(Q q) => Console?.WriteLine(q)` then #251’s treatment of void currently rejects it semantically – but see the comments above about expression-bodied functions for that issue.

    ;

anonymous_function_body
    : null_conditional_invocation_expression
    | expression
    | block
    ;
```

> When recognising an *anonymous_function_body* if both the *null_conditional_invocation_expression* and *expression* alternatives are applicable then the former shall be chosen.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure about this one. To go back to my previous example, consider:

```csharp
Func<string, int?> func = x => x?.GetHashCode();
```

Does that satisfy the requirements of this paragraph? We'd still want to use an *expression* with a *null_conditional_member_access* rather than a *null_conditional_invocation_expression* in order to avoid "losing" the return value, wouldn't we? I may have missed something here.
